*Get started with Aviator

Aviator is a virtual assistant built upon a private Large Language Model (LLM). It seamlessly integrates advanced language models to ease natural and effective conversations, while adhering to stringent privacy and data security requirements essential for businesses, government agencies, and organizations.

Aviator excels at facilitating domain-specific conversations by leveraging real-time enterprise data and documents. With adaptive chunking, Aviator processes only the relevant information. This makes it a valuable tool for IT, HR, sales, and support desk teams, streamlining processes and providing highly relevant virtual agent services.

You can use Aviator in Service Portal, Agent Interface, Mobile app, Microsoft Teams bot, and UCMDB UI. 

Aviator in Service Portal
Aviator in Service Portal offers these features:

Knowledge base integration: Enables Q&A interactions based on your knowledge base.
Reference articles and news: Provides support for referencing articles, news, offerings, and remote articles with Access Control Lists (ACL).
Intent and offering suggestions: Offers assistance in suggesting intents and relevant offerings.
Request/incident handling: Provides suggested solutions and summarize the current request/incident.
Self-managed conversations: Allows you to chat across multiple topics/conversations by switching between the self-managed conversations.
Feedback management: Allows you to collect, report, and export user feedback.
Toxicity prevention: Implements safeguards to prevent toxic or inappropriate content.
Mode switching: Gives the option to switch between Classic and Aviator modes after activation.
Open topic toggle: Incorporates a toggle to allow or disallow open-topic conversations.
Configurable disclaimer message: Allows you to customize and configure the disclaimer message according to your needs.
The following content sources equip Aviator in Service Portal with essential context to quickly resolve issues across a diverse array of data sources.

Knowledge articles
News
Catalog offerings
Virtual agent intents defined by the VA Admin
External articles indexed by using IDOL connectors.
Record types available in Service Portal
Aviator in Agent Interface
Aviator in Agent Interface is an assistant panel designed to boost agents' efficiency and productivity while enhancing the overall user experience. Much like Aviator in Service Portal, Aviator in Agent Interface can answer common questions with human-like responses based on your knowledge base.

You can use Aviator in Agent Interface for the following use cases.

Record management
Service Management provides robust record management capabilities, which are further enhanced by incorporating Aviator.

While analyzing a record (with all OOB and custom application record types which can be searched out by IDOL, such as incident, request, change, problem, … and those record types defined in custom applications), the agent can request Aviator to provide a summary based on title, description, updates, and comments.
While analyzing an incident or request, the agent can ask Aviator for suggested solutions and pose follow-up questions.
Aviator can automatically analyze the sentiment expressed by end users in Requests. If the sentiment is negative, a business rule assigns the Request to your chosen Service Desk group, ensuring that such Requests are responded to quickly.
When a Request is escalated due to negative sentiment, the agent can request Aviator to generate and send an email (based on the negative portion of the request) to the requester that addresses their expressed concerns and provides assurance that the issue is being looked into. 
When an Incident is selected as a knowledge candidate, Aviator can automatically generate a draft knowledge article based on information in the Incident. 
While analyzing an Incident, the agent can request Aviator to propose a solution based on information in the Incident. This solution is saved in the Solution field of the Incident.
Change management
When evaluating a Change, the agent can request Aviator to generate a risk assessment and risk score for the Change. 

Event management
When analyzing an event in AI Operations Management, Aviator displays technical information to aid in diagnosing or resolving the issue. Users can then ask follow-up questions for better event management.

For more information, see AI Operations Management documentation.

Aviator in UD/UCMDB
In UCMDB UI, you can use Aviator to provide a summary or answer questions for a CI when you're on the CI detail page. For more information, see Use Aviator in UD/UCMDB.

Comprehensive guide to Aviator
After purchasing the ITOM Aviator license, you can submit a PCS ticket to request that the SaaS Operations team add the Aviator capability to your tenant. Once added, you can then set up and configure Aviator as needed to manage and use it effectively.

This table provides a comprehensive overview, covering everything from initial setup to troubleshooting. Use it to navigate easily between different topics related to Aviator.

Section	Task	Description
Get started	Aviator overview	Check the Aviator support matrix and the architecture diagram to understand how Aviator functions.
Administer	Enable Aviator	The tenant admin enables the Aviator capability on the tenant and assigns user access permissions. 
Configure Aviator
Configurations
The tenant admin customizes the settings to use the Aviator capability more effectively. For example, the tenant admin can configure the Aviator business rule for various use cases, including risk assessment, sentiment analysis, and knowledge creation. 
Index external knowledge using IDOL connectors	The tenant admin can use IDOL connectors to index knowledge articles from various external sources (such as SharePoint and Confluence) to Aviator. This allows Aviator to generate more accurate and relevant answers based on these external sources.
Aviator models	With permission to access the Aviator Model record type, you can customize various parameters of Aviator models and utilize these models to help Aviator fulfill specific business requirements such as summarizing tickets and suggesting solutions.
Use	Use Aviator in Service Portal	Users chat with Aviator to get the answers needed.
Use Aviator in Agent Interface	Agent users chat with Aviator to get the answers needed, analyze the sentiment of Requests and escalate them if required, automatically generate emails and Knowledge articles, and perform risk assessment of Changes.
Use Aviator in UD/UCMDB	Chat with Aviator to get the CI summary or answers regarding the selected CI.
Language support
Besides English, Aviator supports many other languages. Check the Language support section for more information about Aviator's multilingual support and limitations.


* Architecture
This architecture diagram shows how Aviator interacts with the various components.

image: https://docs.microfocus.com/file/images/general/AviatorArchitecture244.png
The Aviator service, as depicted in the diagram, operates within the OpenText Public Cloud and runs on AWS infrastructure. This architecture is designed to deliver advanced AI-driven operations management for multiple tenants through a secure, scalable, and multi-tiered solution. The Aviator service provides the following key features.

Data processing and isolation
The Vector database (Milvus) is crucial in indexing and storing knowledge and context from multiple tenants, ensuring that data remains isolated between tenants. Each tenant’s context is processed independently, and queries are handled by the Llama 3 AI model within the Aviator service to deliver intelligent operations.

Llama 3 (AI model)
Llama 3 is the core AI engine within the Aviator service, providing advanced AI-driven capabilities. It is responsible for:

Natural language processing (NLP): Llama 3 can understand and generate human-like responses, allowing tenants to interact with the system using natural language queries.
Contextual understanding: By utilizing indexed data from the Milvus Vector database, Llama 3 provides relevant and accurate responses, tailored to the specific knowledge and context of each tenant.
Automation and intelligence: Through its AI capabilities, Llama 3 helps automate routine operations and offers intelligent insights, enhancing overall service management efficiency.
Connection and communication
The API gateway hosted on AWS acts as the intermediary between ESM SaaS tenants and the Aviator service. It ensures that the API requests are securely routed to the Aviator service, enabling smooth interactions across tenants.

On-premises Service Management systems can connect to the Aviator platform through an HTTPS proxy or directly, depending on the network setup, providing flexibility in deployment and maintaining security.


* Use Aviator
In Service Portal, Agent Interface, and UCMDB UI, you can chat with Aviator in natural language. Aviator generates responses based on the input you provide. The response can vary in length and detail depending on the complexity of the query. You can ask follow-up questions to get more accurate and relevant answers or start a new chat to explore different topics.

When using Aviator, be aware of the following:

Don't share any personal, sensitive, or confidential information.
Harmful or toxicity prevention is in place to identify and block content that may be harmful, offensive, or inappropriate. 
It's advisable to cross-reference the information given by Aviator with reliable sources.
If you’re instructed to use a specific language when interacting with Aviator, ensure you do so to enhance the accuracy of Aviator’s responses. See Aviator language.


* Use Aviator in Service Portal

ou can chat with Aviator by clicking the Aviator icon in Service Portal.

Aviator disclaimer acceptance
An Aviator disclaimer popup will appear upon your first interaction with Aviator, prompting for user acceptance. To engage in conversations with Aviator, click Accept.

If you click Cancel, you'll be using the basic Virtual Agent capability. To alter your choice, go to the Preferences page of your Service Portal profile and reset the Aviator disclaimer acceptance option.

Ask a question
Type your question (for example, how to connect to a printer) in the message bar and click Post. Then, Aviator will generate an answer to your question. When the Aviator service connection fails, responses will be generated using IDOL search.
If the answer isn't complete, click Continue generating to view the full text. This button allows for only two clicks and it's not available for open topics.
If a Suggested next steps section is present with some suggestions (including offerings and conversational intents), click an intent or offering to submit a service request. The intents and offerings are displayed according to their relevant scores.
For any follow-up questions, type them in the message bar and click Post. More detailed questions will result in more accurate responses and reference resources.
Whenever Aviator answers, it will provide links to the context documents it used as references for its answers. In the lower-left corner, click  References to expand the References section and click a link to view the details of the reference materials that are relevant to your request.

The reference can be knowledge articles, news, external articles (Confluence and SharePoint), or data of any record types that you are authorized to see. For more information about access control, see Manage entitlement rules and Entitlement rules use case.

Aviator will provide up to seven references depending on the data retrieved. See the Data retrieval descriptions in Aviator models. When no reference on that topic was found, Aviator will respond that it doesn't have information on this topic. It's a default restriction that your tenant admin can toggle on or off. See Configure Aviator.

To comment on the answer provided by Aviator, click the Like or Dislike button and submit your comment.

You can ask your tenant admin to enable or disable the feedback functionality. This function will log your feedback notes along with categorization and debug information for later analysis. See Configure Aviator.

Create a new topic
If you want to end the current topic and change a topic, click Start new topic in the lower left corner. 

To ask a question that belongs to an open topic, ask your tenant admin to enable the Enable open topics functionality for you. See Configure Aviator.

Create a support request
If no information is available, you can submit a support request by following these steps: 

At the bottom of the page, click Create a standard support request.
Describe your problem in detail or upload a screenshot.
Click Submit.


* Use Aviator in Agent Interface

Chat with Aviator
You can chat with Aviator by clicking the Aviator icon in Agent Interface. 

Aviator disclaimer acceptance
An Aviator disclaimer popup will appear upon your first interaction with Aviator, prompting for user acceptance. To engage in conversations with Aviator, click I understand.

Ask a question
Type your question (for example, how to connect to a printer) in the message bar and click the Post icon SMAX242aviatorPostlogoupdate.png . Then, Aviator will generate an answer to your question.
If the answer isn't complete, click Continue generating to view the full text. 
For any follow-up questions, type them in the message bar and click the Post icon SMAX242aviatorPostlogoupdate.png . More detailed questions will result in more accurate responses. If there's no reference resource found in the previous question, Aviator may search and provide reference resources in the follow-up question.
Click the References icon to view the detailed information about the reference materials relevant to your question. See Use Aviator in Service Portal for more information about the References section.
Summarize a record
When you select or open a record (with all OOB and custom application record types which can be searched out by IDOL, such as incident, request, change, problem, … and those record types defined in custom applications) from a grid page, a “New topic” hint message and the ticket number is displayed in the chat window. 

You can click the ticket number to view the details of this record. 
You can click the Summarize this record option to ask Aviator to summarize the current ticket information. You can ask follow-up questions after Aviator provides the summary. 
If you want to end the conversation for the summary, you can click the Start new topic icon and ask another question. 
This feature is only available on the record types that support IDOL based search. For the record types that don't support IDOL based search, such as tasks and approvals, the Summarize this record option won't be displayed. 
Summarize ticket / Suggest a solution for Request and Incident
When you open a request or incident record, or open an existing request in Live Support, a dividing line and the ticket number is displayed in the chat window. 

You can click the ticket number to view the details of this record.
You can click the Summarize this request or Summarize this incident option to ask Aviator to summarize the current request or incident information. You can ask follow-up questions after Aviator provides the summary.
You can click the Suggest a solution option to ask Aviator to provide suggested solution for the current request or incident. You can ask follow-up questions after Aviator provides the solution.
If you want to end the conversation for the summary or solution, you can click the Start new topic icon and ask another question.
Create a new topic
If you want to change a topic in the current conversation, click the Start new topic icon  StartNewTopicIcon in front of the message bar. A "New topic" hint message is displayed in the screen to divide the different topics.

Manage conversations
When you need to chat across multiple topics/conversations, you may use the https://staging.docs.microfocus.com/mediawiki/images/5/5b/smaxAviatorNewConv243.png Start new conversation and  https://staging.docs.microfocus.com/mediawiki/images/4/4e/smaxAviatorConvHistory243.png Conversation history options to create and switch between different conversations.

Start new conversation

You can click the  https://staging.docs.microfocus.com/mediawiki/images/5/5b/smaxAviatorNewConv243.png Start new conversation icon to save the current conversation and create a new conversation.  Each user can create 20 conversations at most.

View conversation history

You can click the  https://staging.docs.microfocus.com/mediawiki/images/4/4e/smaxAviatorConvHistory243.png Conversation history icon to view the conversation list. You may select the conversation name to switch between different conversations.

To rename a conversation, click "..." next to the conversation name and then click Rename.
To delete a conversation, click "..." next to the conversation name and then click Delete.
To sort the conversations by last update time from oldest to newest or from newest to oldest, click  https://staging.docs.microfocus.com/mediawiki/images/6/6e/smaxAviatorOldestToNewest243.png or https://staging.docs.microfocus.com/mediawiki/images/7/7a/smaxAviatorNewestToOldest243.png on the top left corner.
Other action icons
SMAX242aviatorcopylogo.png  : You can click the copy icon to copy the bot response to your clipboard.

movetorightmostedge2.png   and   movetoleftmostedge2.png  : You can move the chat window by dragging the title bar. Also, you can move the chat window to the right-most edge or left-most edge using these two icons.

RefreshIcon  : Refresh the current chat screen. For example, when you open multiple browsers or tabs, after you chat with Aviator in one browser, if you switch to another browser or tab, you need to refresh the chat window to get the latest response to continue the same conversation. 

https://staging.docs.microfocus.com/mediawiki/images/e/e3/smaxAviatorClose243.png  : Close the chat window. You may re-open the chat window by clicking the Aviator icon.

Analyze the sentiment of Requests
Aviator automatically analyzes the sentiment expressed by end users in Requests and categorizes it as "positive", "neutral", or "negative". The result is displayed in the Sentiment analysis field in the Classification section of the Request. If the sentiment is "negative", a business rule assigns the Request to your chosen Service Desk group, ensuring that such Requests are responded to quickly.

Generate and send escalation notifications for Requests
When a Request is escalated due to negative sentiment, Aviator automatically generates an email (based on the negative portion of the request) to the requester that addresses the concerns expressed and provides assurance that the issue is being looked into. A business rule then sends the email to the requester.

Analyze the risk of Changes
An Analyze risk button in the Change form enables Change coordinators to quickly generate a descriptive risk assessment and numerical risk score for the Change. The results are displayed in the AI risk assessment and AI risk score fields.

The risk is scored as follows:

0: There is no risk 
1: The risk is low 
2: The risk is moderate 
3: The risk is high 
4: The risk is very high 
Create Knowledge articles  
When the Knowledge candidate option in an Incident is selected, Aviator automatically generates a draft knowledge article title and text based on information in the Incident. This draft is saved to a new Article record that is linked to the Incident. 

Resolve Incidents
When analyzing an Incident, agents can click the Resolve button in the main menu, and Aviator will propose a solution based on information in the Incident. This solution is saved in the Solution field of the Incident.

Privacy analysis for Requests
Aviator can automatically analyze whether Requests contain private information, including personally identifiable information (such as names and contact details), financial information (such as credit card numbers and bank account details), health information (such as medical records and health insurance information), and other sensitive information (such as authentication credentials and confidential business information). If the Request contains private information, "Private" is displayed in the Privacy field of the Request record together with a short justification, and the Request is automatically assigned to the "HR Private Sensitive" group. Otherwise, "Neutral" is displayed in the Privacy field of the Request record.

View records updated by Aviator business rules
To empower service workflow automation, your tenant admin might have configured Aviator business rules for certain record types so that Aviator can leverage these record data when generating text.

To verify if a specific record is automatically updated by Aviator, go to the History tab of this record and check if the Updated by column shows Aviator. Use your judgment when viewing records updated by Aviator.

*Use Aviator in UD/UCMDB

ou can chat with Aviator by clicking the Aviator icon in UCMDB UI.

Summarize a CI
You can use Aviator to provide a summary or answer questions based on the details of the current CI and the relationship with other CIs. To do this, open the Properties widget for a CI in full screen (the CI detail page), and then click the Aviator icon. In the Aviator chat window, a dividing line and the CI name are displayed: 

Summarize this CI
To interact with Aviator regarding the CI currently displayed in the Properties widget, you can do the following: 

Directly t ype your question regarding this CI in the message bar and click the Post icon SMAX242aviatorPostlogoupdate.png . Then, Aviator will generate an answer to your question. Type any follow-up questions in the message bar and click the Post icon SMAX242aviatorPostlogoupdate.png . More detailed questions will result in more accurate responses. 
Click the Summarize this CI button to ask the Aviator to summarize the information of the current CI. Then, ask follow-up questions after the Aviator provides the summary. For example, when the CI summary generated by the Aviator indicates that the installed software includes various applications, you can further ask if any Microsoft software is installed on the CI.
Ask a question
From pages other than the CI detail page in UCMDB UI, you can click the Aviator icon and ask a general question. Aviator will generate an answer to your question.

In this release, Aviator can only provide general answers to the question based on LLM without UD/UCMDB domain-specific knowledge. 

Create a new topic
If you want to change a topic in the current conversation, click the Start new topic icon  SMAX242aviatornewtopiclogo.png in front of the message bar. A dividing line and a "New topic" hint message are displayed in the screen to divide the different topics.

Manage conversations
When you need to chat across multiple topics/conversations, you may use the https://staging.docs.microfocus.com/mediawiki/images/5/5b/smaxAviatorNewConv243.png Start new conversation and  https://staging.docs.microfocus.com/mediawiki/images/4/4e/smaxAviatorConvHistory243.png Conversation history options to create and switch between different conversations.

Start new conversation

You can click the  https://staging.docs.microfocus.com/mediawiki/images/5/5b/smaxAviatorNewConv243.png Start new conversation icon to save the current conversation and create a new conversation.  Each user can create 20 conversations at most.

View conversation history

You can click the  https://staging.docs.microfocus.com/mediawiki/images/4/4e/smaxAviatorConvHistory243.png Conversation history icon to view the conversation list. You may select the conversation name to switch between different conversations.

To rename a conversation, click "..." next to the conversation name and then click Rename.
To delete a conversation, click "..." next to the conversation name and then click Delete.
To sort the conversations by last update time from oldest to newest or from newest to oldest, click  https://staging.docs.microfocus.com/mediawiki/images/6/6e/smaxAviatorOldestToNewest243.png or https://staging.docs.microfocus.com/mediawiki/images/7/7a/smaxAviatorNewestToOldest243.png on the top left corner.
Other action icons
SMAX242aviatorcopylogo.png  : You can click the copy icon to copy the bot response to your clipboard.

movetorightmostedge2.png   and   movetoleftmostedge2.png  : You can move the chat window by dragging the title bar. Also, you can move the chat window to the right-most edge or left-most edge using these two icons.

https://staging.docs.microfocus.com/mediawiki/images/f/f8/smaxAviatorRefresh243.png  : Refresh the current chat screen. For example, when you open multiple browsers or tabs, after you chat with Aviator in one browser, if you switch to another browser or tab, you need to refresh the chat window to get the latest response to continue the same conversation. 

https://staging.docs.microfocus.com/mediawiki/images/e/e3/smaxAviatorClose243.png  : Close the chat window. You may re-open the chat window by clicking the Aviator icon.

* 25.4 updates

Release notes

Aviator updates
Aviator Agents 
Administrators can create Aviator Agents and define a task plan (with serial or parallel tasks) that the agent will perform when called. 
An Aviator Agent Record enables the execution of all standard manual and automatic tasks, including calls to Aviator and Orchestration flows, as well as Integration Studio. 
Administrators can use the Standard Studio Business rule process to initiate a call to an Aviator Agent and create an Aviator Agent Session record.
The Agent Session record includes the full audit history of all the actions taken by the Aviator Agent. 
Google Gemini
Google Gemini is now available as an optional alternative for the backend large language model (LLM) for Aviator (SaaS customers only).
It offers enhanced multilingual support, a larger general knowledge corpus, and advanced language understanding capabilities.
For customers who are comfortable with their data being processed by Google, this option provides a powerful alternative to our privately hosted LLM.


* A custom Aviator scenario where:
A ticket is created containing angry or negative content.
Aviator performs intent analysis and summarizes the ticket in 5 words.
If the intent is negative, a custom IVR workflow is automatically triggered.